Russia is directly complicit in the bloodshed taking place in Syria and must act immediately to help bring an end to the country’s long-running conflict, the UK defence secretary, has said. Russia must show the resolve necessary to bring this regime to heel, said Michael Fallon in remarks that came a day after Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, cancelled a trip to Moscow after a chemical attack on civilians in Idlib province and the subsequent US missile strike against the Syrian regime. The dead were wherever you looked: inside Syrian town after gas attack. The Russians have influence in the region, Fallon wrote in the Sunday Times. They helped broker the original deal to put chemical weapons out of commission. This latest war crime happened on their watch. In the past few years, they have had every opportunity to pull levers and stop the civil war. Russia was the main backer of Syria’s president, Bashar al-Assad, Fallon said, adding: By proxy Russia is responsible for every civilian death last week. If Russia wants to be absolved of responsibility for future attacks, Vladimir Putin needs to enforce commitments, to dismantle Assad’s chemical weapons arsenal for good, and to get fully engaged with the UN peacekeeping progress. Johnson had been scheduled to fly to Moscow on Monday for talks with Sergei Lavrov, his Russian counterpart. But the Foreign Office said the trip had been called off because developments in Syria had changed the situation fundamentally. The international development secretary, Priti Patel said on Sunday the cancellation of the trip did not mean contact with Russia was being cut altogether. The stories you need to read, in one handy email We are constantly engaging with all our counterparts, and there has been dialogue, she told the Andrew Marr Show on BBC1. The foreign secretary has engaged with his Russian counterpart previously as well. These discussions are continuous, and that is the right approach. However, Labour’s John McDonnell said he believed it was a mistake for Johnson to cancel the visit. I think he should be there now, saying to the Russians just how appalling the situation is and the role that they should play, the shadow chancellor told Sky’s Sophy Ridge on Sunday. We should be frank with them and we shouldn’t just allow the Americans to go off an do that – we should be doing that ourselves. The shadow foreign secretary, Emily Thornberry, said that while opinions inside the Labour party differed, she agreed with Jeremy Corbyn that the US missile strike was not the way forward. There is no military solution to this, she told the Marr Show. The only one is a political one, and the question is, has the last week brought a political solution any closer. I’m afraid it hasn’t. Meanwhile, the US has taken a notably stronger line on Assad’s departure than it had previously done. Nikki Haley, the US ambassador to the UN, said defeating Islamic State, pushing Iranian influence out of Syria and ousting the Syrian president were now priorities for Washington. There’s not any sort of option where a political solution is going to happen with Assad at the head of the regime, she said in an interview on CNN’s State of the Union, to be broadcast on Sunday. Haley said defeating Isis was still the number one goal, but she added: If you look at his actions, if you look at the situation, it’s going to be hard to see a government that’s peaceful and stable with Assad. Regime change is something that we think is going to happen. The comments represent a departure from what Haley said before the US hit a Syrian airbase with 59 Tomahawk missiles on Thursday in retaliation for what it said was a chemical weapons attack by Assad’s forces on Syrian civilians. Fallon reiterated UK support for the US missile strike, saying Trump made the right call by resorting to careful and narrowly focused military action. He wrote: The Americans believed there were no peaceful means of stopping Assad using gas against his population. Given repeated Russian blocking in the UN security council, the US was determined to act. By sending Tomahawk missiles to attack the airfield, aeroplanes and equipment believed to be involved, it has sent a strong signal to the Syrian regime to think twice before using gas in future. Fallon said Theresa May was told before the strike took place, and that he and the US defence secretary, James Mattis, had been in touch to discuss the situation. Falloon also argued for Assad’s departure, writing: Someone who uses barrel bombs and chemicals to kill his own people simply cannot be the future leader of Syria. Assad must go and the search for stability begin. In a departure from the administration’s previous stance, US ambassador to the UN suggests regime change is now one of its priorities Nikki Haley, the US ambassador to the UN, has said that she sees regime change in Syria as one of the Trump administration’s priorities in the country wracked by civil war. Defeating Islamic State, pushing Iranian influence out of Syria, and the ousting of Syrian president Bashar al-Assad are priorities for Washington, Haley said in an interview on CNN’s State of the Union, which will air in full on Sunday. As warplanes return to scene of sarin attack, Trump defends missile launch There’s not any sort of option where a political solution is going to happen with Assad at the head of the regime, Haley said, while reiterating that defeating Isis was still the number one policy goal. If you look at his actions, if you look at the situation, it’s going to be hard to see a government that’s peaceful and stable with Assad. Regime change is something that we think is going to happen. The comments represented a departure from what Haley said before the United States hit a Syrian air base with 59 Tomahawk missiles on Thursday in retaliation for what it said was a chemical weapons attack by Assad’s forces on Syrian civilians. President Donald Trump ordered the missile strike after watching television images of infants suffering from chemical weapons injuries. You pick and choose your battles and when we’re looking at this, it’s about changing up priorities and our priority is no longer to sit there and focus on getting Assad out, Haley had told reporters on 30 March, just days before dozens of Syrian civilians died from chemical weapons injuries. Haley’s latest comments jarred with remarks made by secretary of state Rex Tillerson, who said on Saturday that Washington’s first priority is the defeat of Isis. Once the threat from Isis has been reduced or eliminated, I think we can turn our attention directly to stabilising the situation in Syria, Tillerson said in excerpts from an interview on CBSs Face the Nation, that will air in full on Sunday. Tillerson said the United States is hopeful it can help bring parties together to begin the process of hammering out a political solution. If we can achieve ceasefires in zones of stabilisation in Syria, then I believe – we hope we will have the conditions to begin a useful political process, Tillerson said. Syrian forces launched further airstrikes on Saturday that killed 18 people including five children in rebel-controlled Idlib province, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights and the civil defence rescue service reported. Boris Johnson has cancelled a planned trip to Moscow after the US launched missile strikes on Syria and in the wake of Russia’s continued defence of the Assad regime. The British foreign secretary had been due to fly to Russia on Monday for talks with his direct counterpart, the first such meeting since 2012. But the Foreign Office confirmed on Saturday that Johnson would no longer make the trip because developments in Syria have changed the situation fundamentally. Johnson said: My priority is now to continue contact with the US and others in the run-up to the G7 meeting on 10-11 April – to build coordinated international support for a ceasefire on the ground and an intensified political process. We deplore Russia’s continued defence of the Assad regime even after the chemical weapons attack on innocent civilians. We call on Russia to do everything possible to bring about a political settlement in Syria and work with the rest of the international community to ensure that the shocking events of the last week are never repeated. The US secretary of state, Rex Tillerson, will still go ahead with a visit to Moscow to deliver a clear and coordinated message to the Russians, Johnson said. Russia has condemned US missile strikes on an airbase at Shayrat as an act of aggression against a sovereign state in violation of international law. On Saturday warplanes killed one person and wounded another as they again struck the northern Syrian town where a chemical attack killed 87 people on Tuesday. The British-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said the airstrike on the eastern side of Khan Sheikhun killed a woman, the first death in the town since the chemical attack. The Local Coordination Committees, another monitoring group, said the airstrike was carried out by a Russian warplane. It said the woman killed had fled to the town from her hometown of Latameh in central Syria. At least 15 civilians, including four children, were also killed in a suspected US-led coalition airstrike on Saturday near Raqqa – Islamic State’s Syrian stronghold – the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said. A further 17 people were injured in the strike on Heneyda, according to the UK-based group. Elsewhere in Syria, coalition forces conducted seven strikes against Isis targets on Friday. They claimed to have destroyed four vehicles and three fighting positions, and suppressed nine tactical units near Tabqa. Johnson’s decision came as the US appeared to back away from any wider military involvement in the Syrian conflict, less than 24 hours after launching Tomahawk missiles at a regime airbase. It did, however, say it had put the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, on notice that it would take further military action if he used chemical weapons again. The United States will no longer wait for Assad to use chemical weapons without any consequences. Those days are over, the US ambassador to the UN, Nikki Haley, told a special session of the UN security council. The United States took a very measured step last night, Haley added. We are prepared to do more, but we hope that will not be necessary. The dead were wherever you looked: inside Syrian town after gas attack However, the White House press secretary, Sean Spicer, refused to discuss any next steps – military or diplomatic – as the world struggled to understand Trump’s policy on the civil war. Syrian warplanes were reported to have since taken off from the airbase that was targeted by the US, suggesting that the impact of the overnight attack had been minimal. The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights also said government aircraft had bombed the outskirts of Khan Sheikhun. Spicer called the missile strike on the airbase very decisive, justified and proportional and entirely justified by humanitarian purposes. But he failed to say whether Assad had to leave power, despite Tillerson’s insistence before the missile strike that diplomatic steps to oust Assad were already under way. Washington’s mixed signals on Assad are likely to unsettle or disappoint the Syrian opposition, which initially viewed the strike as a glimmer of hope amid a relentless onslaught. Turkey’s foreign minister, Mevlüt Çavuºoglu, also said on Saturday that Ankara saw the US intervention in Syria as appropriate but not enough. If this intervention is limited only to an airbase, if it does not continue and if we don’t remove the regime from heading Syria, then this would remain a cosmetic intervention, said Çavuºoglu. Trump’s missile barrage suggested a reversal from his previous indifference to Assad’s continued rule. The US president now faces conflicting demands: from Congress to escalate militarily and from Russia to back down. Humanitarian groups, meanwhile, are demanding evidence of a strategy to end the conflict peacefully. At a UN security council session on Friday, Russia’s deputy envoy, Vladimir Safronkov, warned the consequences for international stability could be extremely serious. It’s not hard to imagine how much the spirits of the terrorists have been raised by this attack, Safronkov said. The Russian defence ministry said it was beefing up its air defences in Syria. A defence ministry spokesman, Maj Gen Igor Konashenkov, said the effectiveness of the US strike was very low, claiming that only 23 of the 59 Tomahawk cruise missiles had reached the Shayrat airbase in the Homs province. He said the strikes had destroyed only six MiG-23 fighter jets of the Syrian airforce, which were under repair, but did not damage other Syrian warplanes at the base. The US military said all but one of the missiles had reached their targets. The US was supported by its western allies. France’s president, François Hollande, and the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, said Assad bore sole responsibility for provoking the missile strike. The UK’s defence secretary, Michael Fallon, said the strike was wholly appropriate. Is regime change in Syria back on the US agenda? For most of Syria’s six-year civil war the US has been pushing for the departure of Bashar al-Assad, even if former president Barack Obama was unwilling to use military options to remove him. Donald Trump had conspicuously backed away from that stance, with his administration describing Assad’s rule as political reality shortly before the chemical weapons attack. His team have been careful to present Friday’s missile strikes as a contained response to a specific atrocity, intended as a deterrent to further chemical weapons use. But Trump is nothing if not unpredictable.  His emotions have been stirred – but Trump’s bombs won’t help Syria Russia has already said it will help Syria boost its air defences, a clear signal to Washington that further intervention carries a serious risk of escalation, particularly as Moscow has also threatened to cancel a military coordination hotline. Syrian and Russian radar, air defence systems and fighter jets could potentially limit the impact of future missile attacks while making any mission with manned planes dangerous for pilots. But by choosing to redraw the US red line over chemical weapons Trump has put US military prestige on the line. If there are further attacks with chemical weapons, it would probably be politically and personally difficult for him not to order a response. Will the campaign against Islamic State be affected? In the short term, the push for Raqqa and Mosul, the final two urban strongholds of Isis, is unlikely to be seriously affected. Neither Trump nor his generals are likely to want to decelerate a campaign they hope is moving into its final stages, particularly since Trump has put fighting the extremist group at the heart of his presidency. The threat to suspend coordination on military efforts between Moscow and Washington may make bombing raids somewhat more risky, but there had been limited overlap between Russian and western coalition efforts anyway. The Russian military has supported Assad’s troops, more frequently in fights with other rebel groups than in battles with Isis. The US-led coalition is only bombing Isis, and supporting non-regime military groups. Will Russian support for Assad remain firm? Russia has often said its support for Assad is conditional. Moscow’s desire for a sympathetic government in Syria is likely to be more important than the survival of the Syrian president himself. But in a country fractured by war, there are few obvious alternatives, something Assad may be counting on when he takes risks like a chemical weapons attack. Russia’s strategic interest in backing the Syrian regime, and its willingness to use every tool at its disposal to support Assad – from its jets to its UN security council veto, means he is unlikely to be dislodged any time soon. Assad is also bolstered by Iran, a major regional power. Baghdad does not want to see Syria controlled by rebels close to hostile Sunni Arab states. Do these missile strikes mean an end to Trump’s ‘reset’ of relations with Russia Trump came to power promising a reset of ties with Russia, and openly expressing his admiration for president Vladimir Putin. His victory was welcomed in Moscow, which is suspected of having tried to meddle in the US election to support Trump. Since then, links between Moscow and key members of his campaign team and administration have been under heavy scrutiny. The military strikes, accompanied by blunt criticism of Russia’s failure to stop Assad deploying chemical weapons, appear to have upended that relationship. Trump’s secretary of state, Rex Tillerson, heads to Moscow in a few days. The welcome he gets may provide a clearer indication of whether Russia feels the missile strikes on Shayrat airbase have irreparably damaged ties. It’s possible that after investing heavily in Trump, Putin may want to try and contain disagreements over Syria and focus on bolstering the overall relationship with cooperation in other areas. What are the military risks if the US is drawn further into the Syrian conflict? If the US decides to carry out further strikes, or take other military action against Assad, one of the main worries it that it could hit a Russian plane or soldiers. Moscow was notified of Friday’s strikes before the missiles were launched, giving it time to evacuate troops. But Russia is threatening to suspend the hotline used to deliver that warning and there may be Russians near many potential targets in Syria. If the US hits a Russian target, even by accident, there is a risk of the situation escalating into a direct confrontation between two nuclear-armed powers. Bombing raids often put Syrian civilians in danger in conflict zones, as recent tragedies in Mosul and near Raqqa have shown. And any US military commitment that goes beyond guided missiles could also put the lives of US soldiers at risk. What are the political risks of greater US involvement in the Syrian civil war? One of the questions those opposed to Assad’s rule have struggled to answer for years is what Syria would look like if he was removed. Assad’s ruthless brutality and the long war have bred a fractured, radicalised opposition on the ground. It is dominated by hardline Islamist groups who would like to turn the country into a Sunni theocracy. After years of fighting they are unlikely to hand power to the moderate political exiles more palatable to western powers. Nor is it clear that any successor given control by edict could hold the country together; the fate of Iraq after Saddam Hussein and Libya after the overthrow of dictator Muammar Gaddafi have haunted efforts to push for change in Syria. The struggle to imagine a Syria without Assad was one of the main reasons Obama was reluctant to intervene in support of rebels, and that has not changed. US ability to project power, badly damaged by the disastrous outcome of the Iraq invasion, could also be at stake, along with the country’s slowly recovering economy. Nikki Haley, the US ambassador to the UN, has said that she sees regime change in Syria as one of the Trump administration’s priorities in the country wracked by civil war. Defeating Islamic State, pushing Iranian influence out of Syria, and the ousting of Syrian president Bashar al-Assad are priorities for Washington, Haley said in an interview on CNN’s State of the Union, which will air in full on Sunday. As warplanes return to scene of sarin attack, Trump defends missile launch There’s not any sort of option where a political solution is going to happen with Assad at the head of the regime, Haley said, while reiterating that defeating Isis was still the number one policy goal. If you look at his actions, if you look at the situation, it’s going to be hard to see a government that’s peaceful and stable with Assad. Regime change is something that we think is going to happen. The comments represented a departure from what Haley said before the United States hit a Syrian air base with 59 Tomahawk missiles on Thursday in retaliation for what it said was a chemical weapons attack by Assad’s forces on Syrian civilians. President Donald Trump ordered the missile strike after watching television images of infants suffering from chemical weapons injuries. You pick and choose your battles and when we’re looking at this, it’s about changing up priorities and our priority is no longer to sit there and focus on getting Assad out, Haley had told reporters on 30 March, just days before dozens of Syrian civilians died from chemical weapons injuries. Haley’s latest comments jarred with remarks made by secretary of state Rex Tillerson, who said on Saturday that Washington’s first priority is the defeat of Isis. Once the threat from Isis has been reduced or eliminated, I think we can turn our attention directly to stabilising the situation in Syria, Tillerson said in excerpts from an interview on CBSs Face the Nation, that will air in full on Sunday. Tillerson said the United States is hopeful it can help bring parties together to begin the process of hammering out a political solution. If we can achieve ceasefires in zones of stabilisation in Syria, then I believe – we hope we will have the conditions to begin a useful political process, Tillerson said. Syrian forces launched further airstrikes on Saturday that killed 18 people including five children in rebel-controlled Idlib province, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights and the civil defence rescue service reported. A newsreader in the Indian state of Chhatisgarh has discovered that her husband was the victim of a car crash while reporting the story live on air. Supreet Kaur, a journalist with channel IBC-24, was broadcasting on Saturday morning when a reporter phoned in with details of a fatal car accident in a central district of the state. Indian newsreader starts reporting car crash, discovers on air her husband was victim- keeps broadcasting https://t.co/oFgZDVWIwr Kaur, 28, was told that three of the five people travelling in the Renault Duster had died in the accident. Though the reporter did not identify the dead, Kaur’s colleagues said she had known her husband had been travelling the same route in the same vehicle with four colleagues. Producers confirmed that her husband, Harshad Kawade, was among the men who died, but told the Hindustan Times they did not have the courage to tell her. Nevertheless, Kaur had got a sense that her husband’s vehicle was the one involved in the accident, but continued broadcasting for another 10 minutes, the colleagues said. Death on the road: can Mumbai shed its reputation as the ‘car crash capital’? The moment the cameras were off she began calling her relatives and broke down. She left for the accident site after that, one editor at the station told the Indian Express. It speaks volumes about her sense of duty and professionalism that she continued and kept her calm. According to the World Health Organisation, India’s roads are the among the world’s deadliest, with more than 200,000 fatalities each year. Poorly maintained roads and lax enforcement of driving rules are often blamed, though drivers are also poorly trained and can easily pay bribes to secure a license. han Sheikhun is a ghost town, its streets deserted and silent as though mourning the victims of the atrocity that occurred here two days earlier. The only reminder of what happened is a small, blackened, crater near the northern part of town, where a rocket laced with a nerve agent fell, killing more than 70 people in one of the worst mass casualty chemical attacks in the six-year war in Syria. All that remains of the attack on the town in rebel-held Idlib province is a faint stench that tingles the nostrils and a small green fragment from the rocket. The houses nearby are emptied of the living. The victims’ symptoms are consistent with sarin, the nerve agent that was dropped on an opposition-held area near Damascus in 2013, killing more than 1,000 people. After that attack the regime supposedly gave up its chemical weapons arsenal. Moscow, Bashar al-Assad’s principal backer in the war, said the Syrian government had bombed a rebel-run toxic gas manufacturing plant in Khan Sheikhun, and that the gas had subsequently leaked out. The Guardian, the first western media organisation to visit the site of the attack, examined a warehouse and silos directly next to where the missile had landed, and found nothing but an abandoned space covered in dust and half-destroyed silos reeking of leftover grain and animal manure. Residents said the silos had been damaged in air raids six months ago, and had stood unused since then. You can look at it ; there’s nothing there except maybe some grain and animal dung, and there’s even a dead goat there that suffocated in the attack, one person said. Residents responded in disbelief to the Russian allegation. There was no evidence of any building being hit in recent days or weeks near where so many people were killed and wounded by a nerve agent. The homes across the street appeared undamaged from the outside. There was no contamination zone near any building. Instead, the contamination area radiated from a hole in a road.  The warehouse next to where the missile landed – now an abandoned space covered in dust. Photograph: Kareem Shaheen for the Guardian The Guardian interviewed witnesses, first responders, victims’ relatives and the wounded in an effort to reconstruct the attack. They offered fresh details that shed light on an incident that has prompted worldwide condemnation and refocused attention on the brutality of the Syrian war. It was like Judgment Day, said Hamid Khutainy, a civil defence volunteer in Khan Sheikhun. Witnesses said the air raids began shortly after 6.30am on Tuesday, with four bombings around the town. Initially they thought it was just another airstrike, until the first responders who arrived at the scene began falling to the ground. Khutainy said: They told us ‘HQ, we are losing control’. We had no idea what they were trying to say. Then they said, ‘come save us, we can no longer walk’. So the second and third teams went with just face masks. We could smell it from 500 metres away. People described a scene of utter horror at the attack site . The wounded were shaking and convulsing on the ground, foaming at the mouth, their lips blue, passing in and out of consciousness. I found children lying on the ground, in their last breaths, their lips going blue, said Abu al-Baraa, who lives nearby and rushed to help when the full extent of what had happened dawned on him. Standing across the street from the crater left by the missile, he added: People on the rooftops and in the basements. People on the ground in the street. Wherever you looked there were dead human beings. The suffocating patients and those who had died were taken to the nearby civil defence centre and the adjacent clinic built into the side of a rocky mountainous outcrop to withstand potential airstrikes. The dead were laid in a nearby shed while emergency workers hosed down the injured with water, and administered atropine, a nerve agent antidote. But while medical workers were trying to come to grips with the crisis, between eight and 10 airstrikes targeted the medical facility and civil defence centre. The shed collapsed on the dead, and the site was put out of service. Maybe the pilots heard the myth that you could come back to life 48 hours after dying from sarin, so they decided to bomb them again just in case, said an official from the Ahrar al-Sham rebel group who was on the scene. Thank God there is a Day of Judgment in the afterlife. The Guardian visited the destroyed medical facility and civil defence centre briefly. Local people said reconnaissance planes had been spotted in the sky earlier and believed the area might be targeted again later in the day. The site was filled with rubble. Inside, hospital equipment, beds, surgical instruments and small boxes of medicine lay covered in dust or broken on the ground. There were no weapons in sight, and the rooms inside the cave were darkened with the electricity knocked out. Putin stands by Assad as firm evidence of chemical attack mounts In a nearby cemetery, the graves were still fresh from funerals the day before, the red soil still upturned. In one corner 18 new graves were set up, the names barely etched with a rough chisel on the tombstones. They contained the bodies of 20 people, including two children who were buried with their mother. They were all from the same family. Abdulhamid al-Yousef, one of the few survivors in the family, was receiving condolences at his home in Khan Sheikhun, a day after burying his wife and nine-month-old twins, Ahmed and Aya, fighting back tears. Yousef had rushed to help the other victims of the attack. He came back instead to find that much of his family had perished, including siblings, nephews and nieces. His wife and children had rushed down to the bomb shelter in their basement, only for the toxic gas to seep into it, which killed them all. That evening at the cemetery, he insisted on carrying his two infants in his arms to bury them himself. Almost in a trance Yousef repeated the children’s names, choking as he did so. Aya and Ahmed, my souls. Yasser and Ahmed, my brothers who had my back. Ammoura and Hammoudi, Shaimaa, so many others, he said.
Graphics will be one of the hotter software topics over the next few
years, now that cheap computers can do more visual tricks. And in     
Chapter 7 and Backup VII, you will learn the basics, when charts
are worth the trouble, and how to select the best programs in that
category. Most existing computer guides are overly technical about
graphics, or they just about shun the subject. That is too bad. Graphics
can actually save your company money; computerized charts can help you
set priorities and keep your projects on schedule. At times, too, there
are other advantages. A little Macintosh won’t replace your art
department, but it might enable you to whip up flashy graphs to impress
your customers.

Even with the supposedly simple Macstyle machines, however, you may
still need a good consultantone of the topics of Chapter 8, People.

He or she can help you select the right software, for instance, or teach
you how to use it. But you can’t always trust credentials, and here
you will read of a young company that wasted on the wrong
consultants and their bungles. One man was so learned in computers that
he had helped design the systems on an aircraft carrier, yet he lacked
the exact technical expertise to help the company get its work done.

My old newspaper in the Midwest made another peopletype mistake,
letting a computer expert befuddle staffers with technical jargon. A
whitehaired editor suffered especially. Although he knew his town
better than did just about any other newsman and had been a fixture in
the scruffy city rooms since World War II, the paper exiled him from the
copy desk after the training program failed him. His health gave out
amid the strain, and he ended up on extended sick leave, done in partly
by the course is scary talk of bits and bytes. You use a calculator
without beingas one man put itcalculator literate. Why must you be
computer literate? Be so if you’re an aspiring programmer or if you
enjoy computers as a hobby. If, however, you don’t, well, forget it.
Instead, simply concentrate on  finding the right experts for the
grubby technical chores and  helping yourself and your employees
learn the programs of use on the job.

You can also treat people well by guarding against The Hal Syndrome.
I have named Chapter 9 after the uppity computer in 2001 and 2010.

The best weapons against Hal are good, commonsense ones, like viewable
screens and easytouse keyboards, which can cut down on headaches and
backaches. Forget about the white tiles and bright fluorescents you see
in traditional computer rooms. They can torture your eyes. As for
keyboards, you will learn the wisdom of using the detachable kind, which
makes it easier for you to be the right distance from both the keyboard
and the screen. Why not buy equipment that can adjust to both your eyes
and your back? Foreigners caught on to this issue much more quickly than
we did; some European firms even sawed the keyboards off Americanmade
terminals. And now U.S. workers are demanding action. They affected my
stomach quite a bit, a former insurance company worker says of the
machines that caused her to quit her job. Most days I worked I would
throw up in the ladies room. Whether you use micros or big computers,
you will get more work out of peopleand be able to hire better onesif
the equipment is comfortable to use. Still another precaution against
Hal is good job design. See if you can rotate your employees’ computer
work with other duties to reduce the stress of being at the keyboard all
day.

In the Hal Syndrome chapter, you won’t simply read academic wisdom.
Instead, you will hear about the true health and safety concerns of people
working the computer keyboardseminently valid worries in many cases.

And you will read in an accompanying backup about another hot topic in
this era of contact between man and machine. It is the mouse, the
palmsized gadget that you push along your desktop to guide the cursor
(the little blinking line or other marker that shows where you’re typing
on the computer screen).

Some manufacturers love the mouse as a marketing gimmick. And it is
indeed nice for graphics. If you’re a writer or secretary, however, and
if you lack three hands, you may be better off mouseless. Why? See
Backup X, Of Mice and Men.

I will also try some candor on another touchy topiccomputer crime.

In Chapter 10, Jewels that Blip, you will learn how to protect your
company secrets inside your computer and how to prevent the machines
from suffering amnesia and destroying electronic records. Although
electronic Willie Suttons exist, your real worries are often mundane.
This book won’t keep you from spilling coffee on a floppy disk, but it
will tell how, using good software and good habits, you can help ward
off both crooks and accidents.

Much of Chapter 10 is about larger computers, and quite logically so.
Increasingly, your micros will be talking to mainframes, as the big
machines are called, and your facts are only as safe as the electronic
repositories where you store them.

Computer security will particularly matter in the era of telecommuting,
a subject covered in Chapter 11, Wired to Work, which will show you
how electronic cottages often can be both productive and humane.

A California professor says by 1990 as many as 10 million U.S. workers
could be tapping away on keyboards at home. In Chapter 11, you will learn
how you may be able to telecommute within weeks or months if  your
boss and company are sympathetic and  your office politics permit you
to do so without harming your career. Why wait for official
telecommuting programs from corporate headquarters? Chapter 11 advocates
nothing less than a grassroots telecommuting movement by corporate
writers, programmers, salespeople, and working mothers. Toting up the
savings that telecommuting can yield, more and more corporations will
encourage experiments. Many peoplethough not allthrive on it.

It seems foolish for me to get in a car to go to an office, said a
Washingtonarea telecommuter, if I can go to that office by phone.
Without the wear and tear of rushhour driving he became more
productive.

You needn’t telecommute every day. The chapter, in fact, starts with the
example of the rushhour hater who made it a point to keep up with the
office crowd in person on occasion.

Chapter 12, How I Found ‘God’ on MCI (and a Few Other Odds and Ends
about Electronic Mail), tells more about sending computer messages over
the phone lines. Some Email nets even link up with the old Telex
networks. During the writing of this book I corresponded via computer
with people ranging from William F. Buckley, Jr., to Captain Zap and the
MCI mailTelex connection transmitted lastminute changes to my
publisher.

In Chapter 13, Net Gain, you will learn how different computers in your
own office can share the same programs and exchange information without
people constantly having to carry floppy disks from one desk to another.
A Michigan company may be enjoying as much as DLR a year more in
effective work time from each staffer as a result of its internal
computer net.

Of course, with today is imperfect technology, such hookups can be a real
struggle. But so often they’re worth it.

You could say the same, indeed, of micros in generaltoday and in the
future.

It seemed especially true when, for my last chapter, I tried to reach
Arthur Clarke is micro in Sri Lanka. I wanted him to answer questions
about microcomputers in 2001the year in which his Hal was killing
humans. Did our phonecomputer connection succeed? Read Chapter 14, As
the Jungle Thickens.

Struggles notwithstanding, computers often do pay for harried
professionals and business people. This machine has saved me
from hiring a assistant, said a New York investment
adviser using an IBM PC to write reports and make financial calculations
at home. A young trader forsook the bedlam at the New York Cotton
Exchange for an electronic office in his apartment. Now he can go to
work in his bathrobe and delay his shower until lunchtime. It is more
challenging this way, he said. More contemplation, less raw
instinct.

Another selfemployed man, Jimmy Carter, composed his memoirs on a word
processorperhaps inspired by the example of a former Carter speech
writer who wrote a wellreviewed book on national defense.

Then there is Isaac Asimov, the legendary sciencefiction novelist, who,
even with an ancient manual, could write faster than the old Teletype
machines could clatter along. But he didn’t always produce the neatest
copy. How different now! he exulted in an article. Staring at a page
of type on a television screen, I eagerly look for typos so I can have
the fun of changing them. You needn’t be a professional author,
however, to benefit from computerized writing. In Maryland, an
architectconsultant, once typewriter shy, is now churning out reports
several hundred pages long on his IBM PC.

A boon to the small businessman is how Hugh Hunt, a son of the late
oilman H. L. Hunt, described micros. Now he can compete with the larger
corporations as far as obtaining data and processing it quickly.

Hunt himself was using portable computers in his landdevelopment
business. But he also noted their helpfulness in law:

Computers are one of the ways that small attorneys can compete with
large corporations. By joining a computer bank, they can research briefs
and do word processing, just as the large companies can.

Many Americans apparently shared his views. In 1985, they might buy six
million computers for business use, and within two more years, that
number might almost double. While I was writing this book, the United
States was emerging from the worst economic ordeals since the Great
Depression; a few college graduates had been reduced to shoppingbag
ladies, but the microcomputer business was still growing, even if at a
reduced rate. You might wait three months or more for your Macintosh or
IBM. Some companies died, but others took their places; and even in
times of inflation most prices on micros were dropping; years would pass
before scientists could no longer keep dramatically increasing the
silicon chips’ powers. Forget about the physical smallness of the chips.
It was as if the entrepreneurs in Silicon Valleyin exploiting the
scientists’ advanceswere opening up a vast electronic territory. The
only thing you worry about with computers, Hunt said, pleased, is
‘Should I wait until something better comes along?’

I’m sort of a computer groupie, said Art Buchwald, the syndicated
humor columnist. He was caught up in the new pornography of the era:
those luscious, adpacked micro magazines crammed with the vital
statistics of IBMs and Apples. It used to be that when Playboy
arrived at the house, my wife would say, ‘Your Playboy is here,’
Buchwald told an advertising magazine. Now she says, ‘Your
InfoWorld is here.’ I’m not sure which she prefers. I have a feeling
that Playboy, at least, she could discuss with me.

It was like radio during the 1920s, this micro craze.

Time had proclaimed the computer Machine of the Year in 1982, and I
recalled a song that a friend of my parents, an old woman, had written
years ago. Marconi, Marconi, the lyrics went, the world is at your
feet. How long until the novelty of microcomputers seems just as quaint
as that of radio? The parallels could be there. Two San Franciscoarea
authors, Andrew Fluegelman and Jeremy Joan Hewes, in Writing in the
Computer Age, urged readers to become fullfledged computer
citizensas writers, poets, artists, musicians, programmers,
numbercrunchers, networkers.... The FluegelmanHewes book was useful
and well done. But computer citizens? The phrase grated. I was a user
at the keyboard, a citizen in the voting booth.

Still, I could understand why Fluegelman and Hewes called themselves
computer evangelists. I felt the same way. After having brought us
Muzak and junk food, technology for once was making life better.

I say this with reservations. Educators correctly warned of the computer
literacy gap between Harlem and Scarsdaleof the dearth of machines in
the slums and the bounty in some suburbs. Rich and poor clashed at
schoolboard meetings. In my own county, Fairfax County, Virginia, a
welloff PTA reportedly saved up for micros, then withheld purchases
until it learned whether the school board would spend tax money helping
other schools catch up. And what about unemployment as automation cost
more jobs? Or U.S. firms using computersatellite hookups to pipe in the
work of clerks? The People is Republic of China was even
preparing to sell programming skills to the rest of the world. A billion
programmers, maybe? So much for high tech as a refuge for the American
jobless.

How could you make computerization a joy to all? That was one answer
you’d never find in a computer store.

You could, however, set up the right retraining program for valued
employees to see them through automation. You could fight the Hal
Syndrome. You could work to end boring tasks. In short, you could do
your best to make your computers benefit both your employees and your
company is earnings.

As The Silicon Jungle was lighting up my Kaypro screen one September
day in 1983, several similar machines were whirring and clicking in the
Washington offices of Walter Mondale is presidential campaign.

Kaypros kept track of donations and the $18million budget. They helped
churn out news releases, speeches, and letters to voters in important
primary states. Just eighty people worked at headquarters seven months
into the campaign; Kaypros and other affordable micros were a major
reason why Mondale wouldn’t need legions of backroom staffers in
Washington later on. I didn’t know if Mondale would win or lose the
primary, but whatever happened, it wouldn’t be for want of computing
power.

Fortyfive miles away, near Baltimore, Kaypros at a Westinghouse plant
were receiving computer messages from defense installations abroad.
Other Kaypros sat on the desks of William F. Buckley, Jr., exGovernor
Jerry Brown is research director, and the president of Tootsie Rolls; and
still another, some months earlier, had helped study Barney Clark, the
first man with an artificial heart. A Kaypro in the Midwest was tracking
something else, the milk and manure output of cows.

All of us, Mondale is people, the others, and I, had benefited from the
struggle between Adam Osborne and Andy Kay.

Osborne, a brash excolumnist for computer magazines, had marketed the
first massproduced portable computer. Andy Kay had soon followed with
the Kaypro.

Adam Osborne was a darkhaired, mustached man in his forties who enjoyed
toting his product within sight of photographers. His father, a British
missionary of unconventional stripe, had tried to convert Christians to
Hinduism. Nor did the younger Osborne himself blend into the crowd; he
founded his computer company in 1981 and was soon comparing himself to
Henry Ford and the Osborne 1 to the Model T. I give you, he said,
ninety percent of what most people need.

His rival, Kay, was shorter, about five feet seven inches, but also
slim; like Osborne, he had studied chemical engineering and was a
maverick and newcomer in the personalcomputer business. There, however,
the resemblances ended. Kay was softspoken, graying, an old electronics
hand; his friends depicted him as a qualityobsessed engineer and
Osborne as a flashy marketing man. They said Osborne had seemed
technically incapable of making a good portable with a nineinch screen.
Adam Osborne, in turn, spoke of Kay is computer as if he were a
fourhundredpound wrestler forecasting an instant demise for a foe:
The Kaypro is gonna die.

Gonna die is from Popular Computing. The Osborne statements come
from oftrepeated statements to newspapers or from magazines. Mr.
Osborne, an aide said when I revealed that this chapter was on Brand
X, does not want to discuss the Kaypro.

Andy Kay himself did not speak to me in a normal interview. His
literary agentfriend, William Gladstone, feared that it might
conflict with a project of their own, and Gladstone sought to deny me
ownership of quoted material. Normally I would have told him to stuff
it, but I needed the right quotes to tell the full story of my
computer. So Gladstone and I worked out a compromise. After I sent
thousands of words of questions via my Kaypro over the phone lines, he
obtained Kay is replies on tape. I submitted followup queries when
Kay is answers did not satisfy me. Gladstone insisted on reading this
chapter for accuracy but never tried to censor me; in fact, he was
helpful and pleasant to deal with. He even brought this manuscript to
the attention of a publisher he knew (although I placed it through my
agents). Gladstone is help, incidentally, didn’t influence my
perception of the Kaypro II as better than the archrival Osborne. I
bought a Kaypro at a time when William Gladstone was nothing more to
me than the name of a nineteenthcentury English statesman; I
already loved the company is product. Just the same, determined not
to write an extended press release, I have consulted with the
corporation is critics, and I have run this chapter past a San Diego
Union reporter named Dan Berger, who exposed some of Kaypro is less
admirable management practices. I’m as grateful to Dan as to Bill.

The computer magazines had portrayed Osborne as a lone maverick taking
on the Silicon Valley establishment with the portable that the rest of
the industry said couldn’t be built. But Kay claimed a similar idea had
hit him at the same time.

Andy Kay had seen his soninlaw struggling to carry an Apple and its
trimmings between home and office and decided that a market might exist
for a small machine for engineers, architects, and other professionals.
Then, Kay said, he had heard of the Osborne. Modifying their original
plans somewhat, his people at NonLinear Systems had homed in on their
rival is weaknesses, giving their own computer a better screen and a
better keyboard and the ability to store more data. Adam Osborne had
struck back with a jazzedup version of his first machine. By 1983, many
other companies were in the fray, including Seequa Computer Corporation,
a Maryland manufacturer whose computer sold for less than $2,000 and ran
most IBMstyle programs.

In mid1983 an industry expert was saying Kay and Osborne might together
enjoy $200 million a year in micro sales at the retail level. That was
just a fraction of the $5billionayear market for business micros, but
the two firms then seemed the largest makers of portables in the
$1,000$2,000 range. Their fight was pivotal. Lines were fuzzing
between economy business computers and the home machines; the winner of
the portable battle might go on to fight Apple and IBM, provided it
survived the onslaught of $1,000 computers that Japan was expected to
unleash. By the end of the decade, powerful portables with a quarter the
bulk of the Kaypro II might jam the shelves of the discount stores.

The $200million and $5billion estimates came to me from Chris
Christiansen of the Yankee Group, who said the latter figure might be
very conservative. InfoWorld quoted another research firm, InfoCorp,
as saying that 527,000 portable computers were sold in 1982and that
5.1 million would be sold by 1987.

Kay waged his marketing war from several hillside buildings in Solana
Beach, a small town near San Diego, hundreds of miles south of Osborne
and the rest of Silicon Valley. His was a family business. Kay is
personal housekeeper served salads and fruit juice in the corporate
lunch room, and his eightysixyearold father, known around the plant
as Grandpa, repaired electronic equipment and ran a forklift. Andy
Kay is wife was secretary of the company. One son, David, was the
vicepresident for marketing and had helped develop the Kaypro; a second
son worked in personnel, and a third ran the print shop; and Andy Kay is
daughter and her husband had designed the buildingswhich were now the
same light blue as the KAYPRO II lettering on the computer.    
Altogether, some 450 people worked for Kay is company by mid1983. That
was more than twice the number a year earlier when the Kaypro II was
just hitting the market and Kay was counting on a mere $10 million in
sales.

Bulldozers were growling away amid the expansion, and the company
newspaper said equipmentcluttered grounds resembled a scene from a bad
disaster movie.

No longer was Kay a semiobscure maker of voltmeters and oscilloscopes
and other test equipment. Sales, once $4 or $5 million annually, were
barreling along toward $100 million. Even his company name soon
changedfrom NonLinear Systems to Kayproin recognition of the success
of the division making his hot new computer.

Wall Street and Andy Kay were getting to know each other. That summer
four million shares of common stock hit the market at $10 each; and the
prospectus said Arthur B. Laffer, the Laffer Curve economist, would
serve on the board of directors. Kay still owned most of the company
personally. And now, with the new money, he could give IBM and Apple a
better fight. After 30 years in business, San Diego Magazine had
said, he is suddenly the new kid on the block, clutching under his arms
a couple of excellent bags of marbles.

Before the Kaypro, Kay hadn’t exactly been on the verge of starvationhe
owned an artfilled home overlooking the Pacific and gave to the local
symphony and other cultural causesbut now he’d reached the point where
his admirers were depicting him as a siliconage Horatio Alger
character.

That is a little exaggerated. Kay, though poor in his New Jersey days,
was never an orphaned newsboy toughing it alone.

Grandpa prodded Andy. Frank Kopischianskyan Eastern European
immigrant and an excoal minerworked in silk mills and wool factories
and as a chauffeur. Frank had come to the United States from what is now
Poland. Andy Kopischiansky would later become Andy Kay after his
original name baffled some colleagues at work and they kept calling him
Kay for short.

The Kopischiansky home lacked a bathtub. But, Andy recalled, we
always had food, and I always had a nickel in my pocket. Frank enjoyed
fixing brokendown cars and tinkering with electrical equipment, and
Andy himself built a shortwave radio when he was only twelve years old.
Math was another love. Andy even considered a career as an actuary after
Prudential Life told him he could eventually make $15,000 a year. I
flipped out, Andy said, because it was a lot of money in 1935. Frank
shrugged off the $15,000, however. That is not very much, he said. The
words, incredibly, came from a man who seldom made more than $1,000 a
year during Andy is youth and who sometimes earned just $15 a week.

Andy, growing up in Clifton, New Jersey, took it for granted he could
never afford college, but then the letters M.I.T. came up in a drafting
class.

What is that? Andy asked. I have never heard of the place.

Frank had lost most of his savings in a bank crash, but his wife somehow
scraped up enough money to help Andy reach M.I.T. on a partial
scholarship. Andy graduated in 1940 with a bachelors degree in chemical
engineering, mathematics, and premedicine and worked for the Bendix
Corporation and several other companies before founding NonLinear
Systems in 1953. Kay reached California through a job, although for
years he’d been hoping to enjoy the warm climate there. He started his
company in Solana Beach rather than Silicon Valley because he was
already working in the area. Osborne himself would found his own firm
while living in Berkeleyhe’d locate it in Hayward, a mediumsized city
within twenty miles of the Valley proper, the Palo AltoSan Jose area
southeast of San Francisco.

For NonLinear Systems Kay developed the world is first commercially
successful digital voltmeter. It was the result of some memories from
World War II, when unskilled workers were constantly damaging
voltmeters and having trouble reading them accurately. Kay is new
machine easily survived the careless. The instrument displayed numbers
and didn’t require workers to make a reading off the thin needle of a
conventional meter adjusted for the right voltage. I don’t look at
myself particularly as an inventor, Kay said. I’m a solver of
problems. There are inventors who have many, many more ideas than I
get. Instead, he tried to refine ideas in ways that make sense from
an industrialengineering standpoint and a customer standpoint.

Kay is digital voltmeter was perfect for the military and for the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and their
contractors; unskilled people could help test thousands of voltages on
American missiles. The silos are full of our instruments, he said. But
the NASA cutbacks of the Nixon era hit NonLinear Systems hard.

The seven vicepresidents went, recalled a trade publication, as did
their white Cadillacs. Frank Kopischiansky was willing to help see
NonLinear Systems through bad times, loaning thousands of dollars of
painfully saved money. But that was hardly enough to sustain a
corporation. What about the future? How to avoid the boomandbust cycle
of government spending?

Kay decided to carve out a niche as a maker of rugged portable test gear
for private industry. He wanted to offer many of the same wrinkles found
in costly, benchbound equipment, and one of those features was a
microprocessor in a voltmeter: a miniature electronic brain that would
make it easier to use. The idea came from an old friend, Bill McDonald,
whom Kay had met decades earlier at M.I.T. Their gym lockers were next
to each other is there; both men had loved handball and hated team
sports. McDonald, a husky man of basketballplayer height, had worked
for NonLinear Systems in the early 1950s, then had returned East, where
he had acquired a computer background. Then, in the late 1970s, he’d
rejoined NonLinear Systems, where his friend Kay hoped he would help
develop a computer. Correctly or not, Kay believed that ninety percent
of the electronics business was computer and ten percent was test
equipment, hifi, stereo, and stuff like that. NonLinear Systems had
offered other companies’ minicomputers in systems it packaged for
military contractors, but still wasn’t making machines of its own. Maybe
a small business machine would be one way to enter computerdom.

Two months after Bill came to work for me, Kay recalled, he showed
me some microprocessorbased computers for doing accounts
payablereceivable at the local computer dealer is place.

They were very reasonable, so I bought some and was very intrigued with
them. And I wondered: ‘Why not make this stuff? I could make a better
disk drive. And look at this: this connector doesn’t work too well.’ And
Bill said, ‘We could make them, all right, but I don’t know where you’d
sell them.’ This was in late 1979. I said okay and dropped the idea.

Two years later, however, Kay watched his architect soninlaw, Michael
Batter, struggling with an Apple and knew the time was ripe for an
easiertotote portable.

Kay tried VisiCalc, the electronic spreadsheet, on the Apple and came
away thinking the machine was too complicated, beyond being a hassle to
move from home to office. So Kay told Bill McDonald, Listen, we’re
selling instruments to engineers. Let is make a computer that we can walk
in to an engineer and set on his desk and say, ‘Hey, look at this. You
can use it.’

Still, Kay worried about the new technology. It is a fairly stylized
dance, McDonald reassured him in spring 1981. You buy the chips, and
there is black magic in getting them to workbut not in how they work.

Okay, came the reply, that is it. We will get rid of the disadvantages
of the Apple and cram our computer into one box without cables all over
the place. In ads the Apple looked incredibly compact. Actually,
though, serious computer users needed disk drives to store large amounts
of information for quick retrieval. They also needed a TVlike monitor
to see the letters and numbers they typed out on the computer. And Kay
wisely wanted everything squeezed into one box. If you bought his
machine, you’d get the whole works except perhaps for the printer, which
spewed out your calculations or typed up your letter. Also, it would
cost you less than a full Apple system. Kay could bring down the cost of
a complete machine if he planned on every computer being one.

All this was the logical culmination of Kay is skill in shrinking gear
for the military and aerospace industry. For years he had been making
printed circuit boards and filling them with components. And he could
order the disk drives, keyboards, and other special computertype parts
from outside suppliers.

The way Kay tells it, he had no ideaat firstthat he was about to take
on Adam Osborne. It was six months, he said, before we ever saw
Osborne is literature. He introduced his computer in March 1981, but I
didn’t know anything about it. Some would question that statement, of
course, given the novelty of the Osborne 1 and its creator is flair for
publicity.

Whatever happenedwith Osborne in mind or notKay selected the same
basic technology and essentially similar parts.

     

A microprocessor is simply the main brains that tie together the
memory devices, the keyboard, and other parts of the computer. You can
also call it a central processing unit (CPU).

Okay, but why a Z80 in the Kaypro?

That is simply a style of chip from a company called Zilog. You could
buy those all over the place, Kay said. We wanted something proven and
reliable. The Z80 was the only kind of CPU that could run CP/M
(Control Program for Microcomputers)style programs, then an industry
standard.

The Z80, though, can’t handle programs as complicated as the newer 8088
chip that ended up in IBM PCs and countless clones. Here is why.

A bit is a 1 or a 0. Patterns of bits form bytes. And what is a
byte? Nothing more than a letter or number. So how does this tie in with
the early Kaypro is Z80 versus the IBM is 8088?

Well, the Z80 processes information in words of only 8 bits at a time.
The 8088 in the IBM, however, gulps it down in 16bit chunks and works
with larger memoriesso that the IBM can run more complicated programs,
like the more elaborate electronic spreadsheets for forecasting profit
and loss. There is another benefit, too. A 16bitter doesn’t need to call
up programming information as often from the spinning floppy disks,
which are slower than the purely electronic memories.